---
title: " Firewall Basics – A Beginner's Guide"
date: 2025-06-18
categories: [Cybersecurity, Networking]
tags: [firewall, linux, ufw]
author: Simanta
---

## What is a Firewall?

A software or hardware that protects our digital system from cyber threats, scamming, also protects from unwanted access is called **Firewall**.

---

## ⚙Firewall Services

Firewall provides many types of services including:

- Traffic filtering  
- Access Control  
- Cyber attack defense  
- Network Monitoring  

These are the working procedures of a firewall.

---

##  Types of Firewalls

1. **Packet Filtering Firewall**  
   This firewall works on OSI model's network layer. This uses IP Address, Port scanner, Routing Protocol.

2. **Stateful Inspection Firewall**  
   It analysis network traffic.

3. **Proxy Firewall**  
   This is the most used firewall in our digital systems. This works on OSI Model's Application layer and connects client and server.

4. **Next Generation Firewall (NGFs)**  
   It inspection deep packet on network and works like antivirus, Intrusion Prevention System (IPS).

5. **Software Firewall**  
   This is the only firewall that automatically installed on system like windows defender system and it uses for one digital device.

6. **Hardware Firewall**  
   It's dedicated device firewall that works to control whole network traffic.

---

##  Disadvantages of Using Firewall

- Firewall doesn't ensure the network security.  
- If the firewall's configuration slightly wrong it stops the authorized access.  
- Firewall is not able to analysis encrypted traffic.  

---

##  Examples of Firewall

- UFW (Uncomplicated Firewall)  
- pfSense  
- Cisco ASA  
   
